---
title: "Axe"
domain: "engineering"
source_id: "wikipedia"
source_url: "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axe"
source_title: "Axe"
source_type: "wiki"
topic_type: "wiki_article"
license: "CC BY-SA 4.0"
curator: "oxidus_wiki_crawler"
created_utc: "2026-02-09T13:50:13.048632"
updated_utc: "2026-02-09T20:50:13Z"
lifecycle_state: "raw"
content_length: 13895
links_count: 940
trust_tier: "secondary"
---

An axe (; sometimes spelled ax in American English; see spelling differences) is an implement that has been used for thousands of years to shape, split, and cut wood, to harvest timber, and as a weapon. The axe has many forms and specialised uses but generally consists of a head with a handle (also called "haft" or "helve").
Before the modern axe, the stone-age hand axe without a handle was used from 1.5 million years BP. Hafted axes (those with a handle) date from at least 46,000 years BP by Northern Indigenous Australians. The earliest examples of handled axes have heads of stone with some form of wooden handle attached (hafted) in a method to suit the available materials and use. Axes made of copper, bronze, iron and steel appeared as these technologies developed.
The axe is an example of a simple machine, as it is a type of wedge, or dual inclined plane. This reduces the effort needed by the wood chopper. It splits the wood into two parts by the pressure concentration at the blade. The handle of the axe also acts as a lever allowing the user to increase the force at the cutting edge. Generally, cutting axes, which are used for felling, limbing, and bucking, have a shallow (acute) wedge angle, whereas splitting axes have a deeper (more obtuse) angle. Most axes are double bevelled (i.e. symmetrical about the axis of the blade), but some specialist broadaxes have a single bevel blade.
Most modern axes have steel heads and wooden handles, although plastic or fibreglass handles are also common. Modern axes are specialised by use, size and form. Hafted axes with short handles designed for use with one hand are often called "hand axes" but the term "hand axe" refers to axes without handles as well. Hatchets tend to be small hafted axes often with a hammer on the back side (the poll). As an easy-to-make tool, the axe has frequently been used in combat, and is one of humanity's oldest weapons.


== History ==

Hand axes, of stone, and used without handles (hafts) were the first axes. They had knapped (chipped) cutting edges of flint or other stone. Early examples of hand axes date back to 1.6 mya in the later Oldowan, in Southern Ethiopia around 1.4 mya, and in 1.2 mya deposits in Olduvai Gorge. Stone axes made with ground cutting edges were first developed sometime in the late Pleistocene in Australia, where grind-edge axe fragments from sites in Arnhem Land date back at least 44,000 years; grind-edge axes were later present in Japan some time around 38,000 BP, and are known from several Upper Palaeolithic sites on the islands of Honshu and Kyushu. 
Hafted axes are first known from the Mesolithic period (c. 6000 BC). Few wooden hafts have been found from this period, but it seems that the axe was normally hafted by wedging. Birch-tar and rawhide lashings were used to fix the blade.
The distribution of stone axes is an important indication of prehistoric trade. Thin sectioning is used to determine the provenance of the stone blades. In Europe, Neolithic "axe factories", where thousands of ground stone axes were roughed out, are known from many places, such as:

Great Langdale, England (tuff)
Rathlin Island, Ireland (porcellanite)
Krzemionki, Poland (flint)
Neolithic flint mines of Spiennes, Belgium (flint)
Plancher-les-Mines, France (pelite)
Aosta Valley, Italy (omphacite).
Stone axes are still produced and in use today in parts of Papua, Indonesia. The Mount Hagen area of Papua New Guinea was an important production centre.
From the late Neolithic/Chalcolithic onwards, axes were made of copper or copper mixed with arsenic. These axes were flat and hafted much like their stone predecessors. Axes continued to be made in this manner with the introduction of Bronze metallurgy. Eventually the hafting method changed and the flat axe developed into the "flanged axe", then palstaves, and later winged and socketed axes.


== Symbolism, ritual, and folklore ==

At least since the late Neolithic, elaborate axes (battle-axes, T-axes, etc.) had a religious significance and probably indicated the exalted status of their owner. Certain types almost never show traces of wear; deposits of unshafted axe blades from the middle Neolithic (such as at the Somerset Levels in Britain) may have been gifts to the deities.

In Minoan Crete, the double axe (labrys) had a special significance, used by priestesses in religious ceremonies.
In 1998, a labrys, complete with an elaborately embellished haft, was found at Cham-Eslen, Canton of Zug, Switzerland. The haft was 120 cm (47 in) long and wrapped in ornamented birch-bark. The axe blade is 17.4 cm (6.9 in) long and made of antigorite, mined in the Gotthard-area. The haft goes through a biconical drilled hole and is fastened by wedges of antler and by birch-tar. It belongs to the early Cortaillod culture.
The coat of arms of Norway features a lion rampant carrying an axe which represents King Olaf II of Norway, who was honoured as the Eternal King of Norway.

In folklore, stone axes were sometimes believed to be thunderbolts and were used to guard buildings against lightning, as it was believed (mythically) that lightning never struck the same place twice. This has caused some skewing of axe distributions.
Steel axes were important in superstition as well. A thrown axe could keep off a hailstorm, sometimes an axe was placed in the crops, with the cutting edge to the skies to protect the harvest against bad weather. An upright axe buried under the sill of a house would keep off witches, while an axe under the bed would assure male offspring.
Basques, Australians and New Zealanders have developed variants of rural sports that perpetuate the traditions of log cutting with axe. The Basque variants, splitting horizontally or vertically disposed logs, are generically called aizkolaritza (from aizkora: axe).
In Yorùbá mythology, the oshe (double-headed axe) symbolises Shango, Orisha (god) of thunder and lightning. It is said to represent swift and balanced justice. Shango altars often contain a carved figure of a woman holding a gift to the god with a double-bladed axe sticking up from her head.
The Hurrian and Hittite weather god Teshub is depicted on a bas-relief at Ivriz wielding a thunderbolt and an axe.
The Arkalochori Axe is a bronze, Minoan, axe from the second millennium BC thought to be used for religious purposes. Inscriptions on this axe have been compared with other ancient writing systems.
In Mark Masonry, the axe is a symbol of punishment meant to remind Mark Master Masons to be truthful and avoid deceit.


== Types ==


=== Axes designed to cut or shape wood ===

Broadaxe: Used with the grain of the wood in precision splitting or "hewing" (i.e. the squaring-off of round timbers usually for use in construction). Broad axe bits are most commonly chisel-shaped (i.e. one flat and one beveled edge) facilitating more controlled work as the flat cheek passes along the squared timber.
Adze: A variation featuring a head perpendicular to that of an axe. Rather than splitting wood side-by-side, it is used to rip a level surface into a horizontal piece of wood. It can also be used as a pickaxe for breaking up rocks and clay.
Hatchet: A small, light axe designed for use in one hand specifically while camping or travelling.
Carpenter's axe: A small axe, usually slightly larger than a hatchet, used in traditional woodwork, joinery and log-building. It has a pronounced beard and finger notch to allow a "choked" grip for precise control. The poll is designed for use as a hammer.
Hand axe: A small axe used for intermediate chopping, similar to hatchets.
Mortising axe: Used for creating mortises, a process which begins by drilling two holes at the ends of the intended mortise. Then the wood between the holes is removed with the mortising axe. Some forms of the tool have one blade, which may be pushed, swung or struck with a mallet. Others, such as twybil, bisaigüe and piochon have two, one of which is used for separating the fibres, and the other for levering out the waste.


=== Axes as weapons ===
Battle axe: In its most common form, an arm-length weapon borne in one or both hands. Compared to a sword swing, it delivers more cleaving power against a smaller target area, making it more effective against armour, due to concentrating more of its weight in the axehead.
Dagger-axe (Ji or Ge): A variant of Chinese polearm-like weapon with a divided two-part head, composed of the usual straight blade and a scythe-like blade. The straight blade is used to stab or feint, then the foe's body or head may be cut by pulling the scythe-like horizontal blade backwards. Ge has the horizontal blade but sometimes does not have the straight spear.
Dane axe: a long-handled weapon with a large flat blade, often attributed to the Norsemen.
Halberd: a spear-like weapon with a hooked poll, effective against mounted cavalry.
Head axe: a type of thin-bladed axe with a distinctive shape specialized for headhunting from the Cordilleran peoples of the Philippines.
Hurlbat: An entirely metal throwing axe sharpened on every auxiliary end to a point or blade, practically guaranteeing some form of damage against its target.
Ono: a Japanese weapon wielded by sōhei warrior monks.
Panabas: A chopping bladed tool or weapon from the Philippines often described as a cross between a sword and a battle axe.
Parashu: The parashu (Sanskrit: paraṣu) is an Indian battle-axe. It is generally wielded with two hands but could also be used with only one. It is depicted as the primary weapon of Parashurama, the 6th Avatar of Lord Vishnu in Hinduism.
Poleaxe: designed to defeat plate armour. Its axe (or hammer) head is much narrower than other axes, which accounts for its penetrating power.
Sagaris: An ancient weapon used by Scythians.
Shepherd's axe: used by shepherds in the Carpathian Mountains, it could double as a walking stick.
Throwing axe: A weapon that was thrown and designed to strike with a similar splitting action as its handheld counterparts. These are often small in profile and usable with one hand.
Tomahawk: used almost exclusively by Native Americans, its blade was originally crafted of stone. Along with the familiar war version, which could be fashioned as a throwing weapon, the pipe tomahawk was a ceremonial and diplomatic tool.
Yue: A Chinese weapon with very large axe blade, also served as ceremonial weapon.


=== Axes as tools ===

Ice axe or climbing axe: A number of different styles of ice axes are designed for ice climbing and enlarging steps used by climbers.
Mattock: A dual-purpose axe, combining an adze and axe blade, or sometimes a pick and adze blade.
Pickaxe: An axe with a large pointed end, rather than a flat blade. Sometimes exists as a double-bladed tool with a pick on one side and an axe or adze head on the other. Often used to break up hard material.
Pulaski: An axe with a mattock blade built into the rear of the main axe blade, used for digging ('grubbing out') through and around roots as well as chopping.
Splitting maul: A splitting implement that has evolved from the simple "wedge" design to more complex designs.


=== Axes for sport ===
Throwing axe: A tool that was thrown and designed to strike wooden targets and stay embedded in the target to score points in sport throwing competitions such as those hosted by the World Axe Throwing League. These can range from axes that are small in profile and usable with one hand, or longer axes thrown with two hands.
Racing axe: A tool designed for competitive wood chopping sports such as the Stihl Timbersports Series.


== Hammer axe ==
Hammer axes (or axe-hammers) typically feature an extended poll, opposite the blade, shaped and sometimes hardened for use as a hammer. The name axe-hammer is often applied to a characteristic shape of perforated stone axe used in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages. Iron axe-hammers are found in Roman military contexts, e.g. Cramond, Edinburgh, and South Shields, Tyne and Wear.


== See also ==
Axe murder
Cleaving axe
Corded Ware culture
Fasces
Kaiser blade
Nzappa zap
Sagaris
Related forestry terms

Felling
Hewing
Limbing
Pruning
Splitting maul
Woodchopping


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Neolithic axes

Borkowski, W. (1995). Krzemionki mining complex. Warsaw.
Bradley, R.; Edmonds, M. (1993). Interpreting the axe trade: production and exchange in Neolithic Britain.
Pétrequin, P. (1995). La hache de pierre: carrières vosgiennes et échanges de lames polies pendant le néolithique (5400 – 2100 av. J.-C.). (exposition musées d'Auxerre Musée d'Art et d'Histoire). Paris: Ed. Errance (in French).
Pétrequin P.; Pétrequin, A.M. (1993). Écologie d'un outil: la hache de pierre en Irian Jaya (Indonésie). Paris: CNRS Éditions, Mongr. du Centre Rech. Arch. 12 (in French).
Medieval axes

Schulze, André (editor) (2007). Mittelalterliche Kampfesweisen. Band 2: Kriegshammer, Schild und Kolben. Mainz am Rhein: Zabern. ISBN 3-8053-3736-1 (in German).
Modern axes

Kauffman, Henry J. (1994). American Axes: A Survey of their Development and their Makers. Elverson, Pennsylvania: Olde Springfield Shoppe. 152 pp. ISBN 188329412-6.
Klenman, Allan; McPhail, Larry (2006). Axe Makers of North America: A Collection of Axe History & Manufacturers. Bellingham, Washington: Print & Copy Factory LLC. ISBN 0-9690755-4-5. 160 pp.
McLeod, Brett (2020). American Axe: The Tool That Shaped A Continent. North Adams, Massachusetts: Storey Publishing. 192 pp. ISBN 978-1-63586-139-6.
Reissinger, Gottfried (1959). Die Konstruktionsgrundlagen der Axt. Hamburg: Parey. ISBN 978-3490211163 (in German).
Superstition

H. Bächtold-Stäubli, H. (1987). Handwörterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens. Berlin: De Gruyter (in German).


== External links ==

Section about types of axes is originally based on a Quicksilver Wiki article at the timber framing glossary under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

## Links
- 3D scanning
- AX (disambiguation)
- Abrasive
- Abrasive saw
- Abri de la Madeleine
- Acacia melanoxylon
- Acheulean
- Adze
- Aerial firefighting
- Afforestation
- Agathis
- Aizkolaritza
- Alder
- Alligator drum
- Amber
- American Association of Woodturners
- American English
- American and British English spelling differences
- Angle gauge
- Anigre
- Antigorite
- Aosta Valley
- Archaeoastronomy
- Archaeological culture
- Architectural Woodwork Institute
- Ard (plough)
- Areni-1 winery
- Arkalochori Axe
- Arnhem Land
- Arrow
- Arrowhead
- Arsenic
- Art of the Middle Paleolithic
- Art of the Upper Paleolithic
- Artifact (archaeology)
- Aspen
- Aurignacian
- Australia
- Averruncator
- Axe (disambiguation)
- Axe murder
- Axe throwing
- Axed (disambiguation)
- Axes (disambiguation)
- Aşıklı Höyük
- Backsaw
- Band clamp
- Bandsaw
- Bannerstone
- Bare Island projectile point
- Basket
- Basket weaving
- Basque people
- Baton fragment (Palart 310)
- Battle axe
- Bead (woodworking)
- Beadwork
- Bed
- Bedrock plane
- Beech
- Before Present
- Behavioral modernity
- Bevel
- Bibcode (identifier)
- Bilinga (wood)
- Billhook
- Biltmore stick
- Birch
- Birch-tar
- Birch bark
- Bird stone
- Birdsmouth joint
- Biscuit joiner
- Blade
- Blade (archaeology)
- Block plane
- Blombos Cave
- Boat building
- Bolt cutter
- Bone tool
- Boomerang
- Bow and arrow
- Bow drill
- Bow saw
- Bowl barrow
- Box joint
- Brescia
- Bridle joint
- British Museum
- British Woodworking Federation
- British megalith architecture
- Broaching (metalworking)
- Broad axe
- Broadaxe
- Broadfork
- Broch
- Bronocice pot
- Bronze
- Bronze Age
- Brush hook
- Brushcutter (garden tool)
- Bucksaw
- Buffalo jump
- Building and Wood Workers' International
- Burdei
- Burin (lithic flake)
- Burnisher
- Burnt mound
- Bush carpentry
- Butt joint
- Butterfly joint
- Buxus
- C-clamp
- Cabinetry
- Cairn
- Calocedrus
- Camphora officinarum
- Camping
- Caning (furniture)
- Canoe
- Cant hook
- Canton of Zug
- Carapa guianensis
- Card scraper
- Cardium pottery
- Caricature carving
- Carpathian Mountains
- Carpenter's axe
- Carpentry
- Carved stone balls
- Cascade point
- Caulk boots
- Causewayed enclosure
- Cavalry
- Cave
- Cave painting
- Cedrela
- Cedrus
- Celt (tool)
- Ceramic tile cutter
- Ceremonial weapon
- Certosina
- Chain (unit)
- Chainsaw
- Chainsaw carving
- Chainsaw mill
- Chainsaw safety clothing
- Chainsaw safety features
- Chalcolithic
- Chamber tomb
- Chamfer
- Chamfer plane
- Check dam
- Chestnut
- Chip carving
- Chisel
- Chopper (archaeology)
- Chopping tool
- Circular saw
- Cist
- Cistern
- Clamp (tool)
- Clava cairn
- Clay
- Cleaver (Stone Age tool)
- Cleaving axe
- Cliff dwelling
- Clovis culture
- Clovis point
- Coat of arms of Norway
- Cocobolo
- Combination square
- Compass saw
- Concrete saw
- Control of fire by early humans
- Cooking
- Coping (joinery)
- Coping saw
- Copper
- Cord-marked pottery
- Corded Ware culture
- Cordilleran peoples
- Cortaillod culture
- Cotswold-Severn Group
- Countersink
- Court cairn
- Cramond
- Cremation
- Creswellian culture
- Crete
- Crops
- Cross-laminated timber
- Crosscut saw
- Crown of Thorns (woodworking)
- Cruising rod
- Cultivator
- Cumberland point
- Cup and ring mark
- Cupstone
- Cursus
- Cutting
- Cutting tool (machining)
- Cypress
- DC-10 Air Tanker
- Dacrydium cupressinum
- Dado (joinery)
- Dagger-axe
- Daisy grubber
- Dalbergia melanoxylon
- Dane axe
- Dartmoor kistvaens
- Debitage
- Deity
- Denailer
- Denticulate tool
- Dethatcher
- Diagonal pliers
- Diameter tape
- Diamond blade
- Diamond tool
- Dibber
- Diepkloof Rock Shelter
- Digging stick
- Dipteryx odorata
- Disc cutter
- Divje Babe flute
- Doi (identifier)
- Dolmen
- Domestication
- Douglas fir
- Dovetail joint
- Dragsaw
- Drawknife
- Drill
- Drill bit
- Drilling
- Driptorch
- Drying oil
- Dugout (shelter)
- Dyera costulata
- Earth auger
- Earth oven
- Ebony
- Eden point
- Edge banding
- Edger
- Edinburgh
- Egyptian hieroglyphs
- Elm
- Emery cloth
- Engineered wood
- Entandrophragma
- Entheogenic drugs and the archaeological record
- Ethiopia
- Eucalyptus
- Eucalyptus marginata
- Europe
- Evolutionary musicology
- Evolutionary origin of religion
- F-clamp
- Fasces
- Feature (archaeology)
- Feller buncher
- Felling
- Fence (woodworking)
- Ferrous metallurgy
- Fibreglass
- File (tool)
- Finger joint
- Finger plane
- Fir
- Fire-saw
- Fire flapper (tool)
- Fire hardening
- Fire plough
- Fire rake
- Fire retardant
- Firewood processor
- Flat sawing
- Flint axe
- Float (woodworking)
- Flooring clamp
- Flush toilet
- Folklore
- Folsom point
- Fore plane
- Forest railway
- Forestry
- Forestry mulching
- Forwarder
- Founder crops
- Frame and panel
- Frame saw
- Frameless construction
- Fraxinus excelsior
- French polish
- Fretsaw
- Fretwork
- Froe
- Fulacht fiadh
- GNU Free Documentation License
- Gallery grave
- Gallo-Roman Museum, Tongeren
- Game drive system
- Garden fork
- Garden hose
- Garden tool
- Gauge (instrument)
- Geoglyph
- Gimlet (tool)
- Glass cutter
- Glossary of archaeology
- Glossary of woodworking
- Glued laminated timber
- Go-devil
- Goad
- Golden hat
- Gonystylus
- Goseck Circle
- Gotthard Pass
- Grafter
- Granary
- Grass Stitcher
- Grass shears
- Grater
- Grattoir de côté
- Grave goods
- Gravettian
- Great dolmen
- Green woodworking
- Grime's Graves
- Grind
- Grinding slab
- Grinding wheel
- Gripe (tool)
- Groasis Waterboxx
- Groove (joinery)
- Grooved ware
- Grooves (archaeology)
- Grooving plane
- Ground stone
- Grønsalen
- Guardian stones
- Gudi (instrument)
- Guibourtia
- Guibourtia ehie
- Gwion Gwion rock paintings
- Hacksaw
- Hafting
- Hail
- Halberd
- Halved joint
- Hammer
- Hammer-headed tenon
- Hammerstone
- Hand axe
- Hand compass
- Hand saw
- Hand scraper
- Handroanthus
- Hardboard
- Hardwood
- Harpoon
- Harvester (forestry)
- Hatchet
- Hazel
- Hdl (identifier)
- Head axe
- Head saw
- Headhunting
- Hearth
- Heat bending of wood
- Heavy equipment
- Hedge trimmer
- Heli-logging
- Helitack
- Hemispherical photography
- Henge
- Hewing
- Hickory
- Hill figure
- Hinduism
- Hinge bender
- History of agriculture
- History of archery
- History of architecture
- History of clothing and textiles
- History of cosmetics
- History of hide materials
- History of painting
- History of technology
- History of the wine press
- History of weapons
- History of wine
- History of wood carving
- Hittites
- Hoe (tool)
- Holdfast (tool)
- Hole saw
- Homi (tool)
- Honing steel
- Honshu
- Hook (hand tool)
- Hori hori
- Hornbeam
- Howiesons Poort
- Hunting hypothesis
- Hurlbat
- Hurrian
- Hut
- Hydraulic debarker
- ISBN (identifier)
- Ice axe
- Ice climbing
- Impact driver
- Inclined plane
- Inclinometer
- Increment borer
- Indigenous Australians
- Indonesia
- Industry (archaeology)
- Intarsia
- International Federation of Building and Wood Workers
- Intsia bijuga
- Irian Jaya
- Iroko
- Iron
- Irrigation
- Irrigation sprinkler
- Italy
- Ivriz
- Jacal
- Jack plane
- Janka hardness test
- Japan
- Japanese carpentry
- Japanese people
- Japanese plane
- Jar burial
- Jewellery
- Jigsaw (tool)
- Joinery
- Jointer
- Jointer plane
- Juglans
- Juniper
- Jōmon pottery
- Kaiser blade
- Kalvola
- Keyhole saw
- Khatam
- Khaya
- Kiln
- King Baudouin Foundation
- Kirpi
- Kiva
- Knapping
- Knee (construction)
- Knife
- Kohlrosing
- Krzemionki
- Kuyavian long barrows
- Kyushu
- Labrys
- Lacquer
- Lamoka projectile point
- Langdale axe industry
- Lap joint
- Larch
- Laser cutting
- Laser rangefinder
- Lashing (ropework)
- Lawn aerator
- Lawn mower
- Lawn sweeper
- Leaf blower
- Levallois technique
- Lever
- Lightning
- Lignum vitae
- Limbing
- Linear Pottery culture
- List of Stone Age art
- List of archaeoastronomical sites by country
- List of burial mounds in the United States
- List of oldest extant buildings
- List of plants known as cedar
- List of stone circles
- List of timber framing tools
- List of woods
- Lithic analysis
- Lithic core
- Lithic flake
- Lithic reduction
- Lithic technology
- Log bucking
- Log building
- Log flume
- Log house moulder
- Log pond
- Log splitter
- Logging
- Logging truck
- Lombard Steam Log Hauler
- Long barrow
- Longhouse
- Loppers
- Lovoa trichilioides
- Loy (spade)
- Lumber
- Lumber edger
- Lunar calendar
- Luthier
- Machete
- Magdalenian
- Mahogany
- Male
- Mallet
- Malus
- Manis Mastodon Site
- Mano (stone)
- Maple
- Marking axe
- Marquetry
- Mason's miter
- Mattock
- McLeod (tool)
- Meat slicer
- Medium-density fibreboard
- Megalith
- Megalithic architectural elements
- Megalithic art
- Megalithic tomb
- Mehrgarh
- Menhir
- Mesolithic
- Metallurgy
- Metate
- Mezzaluna
- Microblade technology
- Microlith
- Microtome
- Midden
- Middle Stone Age
- Millettia laurentii
- Milling (machining)
- Milling cutter
- Millwork
- Minoan civilization
- Mirror
- Miter clamp
- Miter joint
- Miter saw
- Miter square
- Mitre box
- Molding (decorative)
- Mortar and pestle
- Mortise and tenon
- Moulding plane
- Mound Builders
- Mount Hagen
- Mousterian
- Mudbrick
- Mummy
- Music archaeology
- Nail clipper
- National Wood Carvers Association
- Nature (journal)
- Navajo pueblitos
- Neolithic
- Neolithic Revolution
- Neolithic architecture
- Neolithic circular enclosures in Central Europe
- Neolithic flint mines of Spiennes
- Neolithic long house
- Ness of Brodgar
- New World crops
- New Zealanders
- Nibbler
- Nordic megalith architecture
- Norsemen
- Nzappa zap
- Oak
- Oar
- Ochroma
- Ocotea porosa
- Offspring
- Ogee
- Ogive
- Olaf II of Norway
- Oldowan
- Olduvai Gorge
- Omphacite
- Ono (weapon)
- Order of Mark Master Masons
- Oriented strand board
- Origin of language
- Orisha
- Outline of prehistoric technology
- Ovolo
- Oxy-fuel welding and cutting
- Oystering
- PMID (identifier)
- Paint
- Paint scraper
- Paint stripper
- Paleolithic flute
- Paleolithic religion
- Pallet crafts
- Palstave
- Panabas
- Papua (province)
- Papua New Guinea
- Parashu
- Parashurama
- Parquet
- Particle board
- Passage grave
- Pear
- Peavey (tool)
- Pelite
- Peltogyne
- Pencil sharpener
- Pericopsis elata
- Pesse canoe
- Petroform
- Petroglyph
- Petrosomatoglyph
- Pickaroon
- Pickaxe
- Pictogram
- Pigment
- Pike pole
- Pine
- Pipe clamp
- Pipecutter
- Pit-house
- Pitchfork
- Pizza cutter
- Plancher-les-Mines
- Plane (tool)
- Plano point
- Plasma cutting
- Plate armour
- Pleistocene
- Pleistocene human diet
- Plough
- Plum
- Plywood
- Pocket knife
- Podocarpus totara
- Polearm
- Poleaxe
- Polesaw
- Populus
- Porcellanite
- Portable sawmill
- Post hole digger
- Pottery
- Potting bench
- Pottiputki
- Prehistoric art
- Prehistoric counting
- Prehistoric medicine
- Prehistoric music
- Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps
- Prehistoric religion
- Prehistoric storage pits
- Prehistoric technology
- Prehistoric warfare
- Prehistory
- Prepared-core technique
- Prismatic blade
- Projectile point
- Provenance (geology)
- Pruning
- Pruning shears
- Prunus
- Pterocarpus
- Pueblo
- Pulaski (tool)
- Purfling
- Putty knife
- Pyramid
- Pyre
- Pyrography
- Qesem Cave
- Quarter sawing
- Quern-stone
- Quicksilver Wiki
- Quiggly hole
- Rabbet
- Racing axe
- Racloir
- Rake (tool)
- Rangefinding telemeter
- Rasp
- Rathlin Island
- Rawhide (material)
- Razee plane
- Razor
- Razor strop
- Reamer
- Rebate plane
- Rectangular dolmen
- Relascope
- Relief carving
- Religion
- Resaw
- Reservoir
- Rex Perpetuus Norvegiae
- Riddle (tool)
- Rift sawing
- Ring cairn
- Rip cut
- Ripsaw
- Rock (geology)
- Rock art
- Rock cupule
- Rock shelter
- Root carving
- Root trainer
- Rope
- Rosewood
- Round barrow
- Roundhouse (dwelling)
- Router (woodworking)
- Router plane
- Rubberwood
- Rumor
- S2CID (identifier)
- Sagaris
- Sandpaper
- Sanskrit language
- Sapele
- Saw
- Sawbuck
- Sawmill
- Scalpel
- Scarf joint
- Schinopsis
- Schöningen spears
- Scissors
- Scraper (archaeology)
- Scroll saw
- Scrub plane
- Sculpture
- Scythe
- Scythians
- Secondary products revolution
- Seed trap
- Segmented turning
- Sewing needle
- Shang dynasty
- Shango
- Sharpening jig
- Sharpening stone
- Shaving horse
- Shepherd's axe
- Shingle weaver
- Shipbuilding
- Shoe
- Shorea
- Shoulder plane
- Shovel
- Sibudu Cave
- Sickle
- Sill plate
- Simple dolmen
- Simple machine
- Skid cone
- Skidder
- Smoothing plane
- Snips
- Social status
- Society of Wood Engravers
- Softwood
- Solutrean
- Somerset Levels
- South Shields
- Spade
- Spear
- Spear-thrower
- Speed square
- Spindle turning
- Splice joint
- Splitting maul
- Spokeshave
- Spruce
- Square (tool)
- Statue menhir
- Steam bending
- Steam donkey
- Steel
- Steel square
- Steel wool
- Stihl Timbersports Series
- Stilt house
- Stitching awl
- Stone Age
- Stone box grave
- Stone carving
- Stone circle
- Stone circles in the British Isles and Brittany
- Stone row
- Stone tool
- Stonehenge
- Striking platform
- String trimmer
- Stump grinder
- Superstition
- Surform
- Swanscombe Heritage Park
- Sweet Track
- Swietenia
- Swing yarder
- Switchblade
- Switzerland
- Sōhei
- Table saw
- Tally stick
- Taxus
- Teak
- Technology
- Terminalia ivorensis
- Terrace (earthworks)
- Teshub
- Thickness planer
- Thornborough Henges
- Three-age system
- Throwing Axe
- Throwing axe
- Throwing stick
- Thunderbolt
- Tilia
- Timber Framers Guild
- Timber circle
- Timber framing
- Timber trackway
- Timeline of clothing and textiles technology
- Timeline of prehistory
- Tomahawk
- Tongue and groove
- Tool
- Tool bit
- Tool stone
- Tor cairn
- Tor enclosure
- Trade
- Transepted gallery grave
- Transverse arrowhead
- Travel
- Tree baler
- Tree caliper
- Tree measurement
- Tree planting
- Tree planting bar
- Tree shelter
- Tree spade
- Treen
- Trepanning
- Trowel
- Try square
- Tsakat
- Tuff
- Tumulus
- Turraeanthus africanus
- Two-man saw
- Twybil
- Tyne and Wear
- Tórshavn
- Unchambered long barrow
- Unchambered long cairn
- Uniface
- Unmanned aerial vehicle
- Unstan ware
- Upper Palaeolithic
- Utility knife
- Varnish
- Veneer hammer
- Veneer saw
- Venus figurine
- Vise
- Vishnu
- Warring States period
- Warrington hammer
- Warrior monk
- Washington Winch
- Water jet cutter
- Watering can
- Wattle and daub
- Wax
- Wayback Machine
- Wear
- Weather
- Weaving
- Wedge
- Wedge-shaped gallery grave
- Wedge (mechanical device)
- Wedge prism
- Weeder
- Well
- Wheel
- Wheelbarrow
- Whipsaw
- Whittling
- Whoopie sling
- Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel
- Willow
- Winding stick
- Wire brush
- Wire saw
- Wire stripper
- Witchcraft
- Wood
- Wood auger
- Wood carving
- Wood drying
- Wood finishing
- Wood glue
- Wood preservation
- Wood scribe
- Wood shaper
- Wood splitting
- Wood stain
- Woodchipper
- Woodchopping
- Woodturning
- Woodworking
- Woodworking joints
- Wood–plastic composite
- Woomera (spear-thrower)
- Workbench (woodworking)
- World Axe Throwing League
- Yarder
- Yoruba religion
- Yubetsu technique
- Zebrawood
- Ébéniste
- Ötzi
